many of our viewers have asked us a very
serious question what if we made a big
pile of bombs and exploded every nuclear
weapon in the world or at once strangely
enough we couldn't find a good source to
answer this question to our satisfaction
so we gathered together a few scientists
to calculate what would happen and find
an answer to this extremely important
scientific problem once and for all
currently there are 15,000 nuclear
weapons on earth the US and Russia both
have around 7,000 well France China the
UK Pakistan India Israel and North Korea
own around 1,000 between them but how
much destructive power is this really
let's try to put these numbers into
perspective on earth there are about
4,500 cities or urban areas with at
least 100,000 inhabitants some are
bigger than others so we'll assume that
on average we need three nuclear bombs
to completely wipe out one city this
means we could destroy every single city
on planet earth without nuclear arsenal
killing more than three billion people
roughly half of humanity in an instant
and we'd still have 1,500 nuclear
weapons left now that's what an expert
would call overkill so we can say with
confidence that we had a lot of nuclear
weapons and they can do a lot of damage
but what if we make a huge pile of all
15,000 bombs and pull the trigger let's
drop our nuclear pile in the middle of
the Amazon rainforest just a show nature
who's boss our warheads piled
haphazardly fit into a small warehouse a
typical US warhead has the power of two
hundred thousand tons of TNT so fifteen
thousand warheads would be the
equivalent of three billion tons of TNT
for scale this is enough to rebuild the
whole island of Manhattan with every
building and skyscraper using stacks of
TNT the closest thing we can compare to
the energy gathered here is a volcano
the deadliest volcanic eruptions in
recorded history took place in 1883 on
the island of Krakatoa the eruption was
so powerful that 70% of the island and
the surrounding archipelago was
destroyed killing tens of thousands of
people its effects were felt around the
world four days after the event
our nuclear pile contains 15 times the
energy of the Krakatoa volcanic eruption
so let's finally push the button three
two one in a second a fireball 50
kilometers across vaporizes everything
in its way and creates a blast wave that
flattens 3000 square kilometres of
forest every living thing within 250
kilometers will start to burn the
explosion will be heard literally around
the world as the pressure wave circles
the earth tens of times over the next
few weeks millions of tons of
incinerated material are catapulted into
the atmosphere the mushroom cloud
reaches the outer reaches of the
stratosphere pushing up against space
itself after things have calmed down a
small crater about ten kilometers across
is left in the center of the worst world
fires the planets has seen in millenia
spreading throughout South America
burning down forests and cities alike
and now the unpleasant part begins
extremely radioactive material will kill
living things very quickly and a large
area several kilometers around the
crater is now uninhabitable as is
everywhere for hundreds of kilometers
downwind much of the fallout is carried
high into the atmosphere by the mushroom
cloud and carried around the planet the
amount of radioactive material in the
environment doubles worldwide which
still isn't civilization ending but we
may see more cancer for a while a
portion of the particles will flow to
the edge of space for years and cause a
nuclear winter that could lower global
temperatures by a few degrees for a few
years this explosion was pretty bad if
you're in South America and especially
Brazil the Amazon rainforest is pretty
much history which is not great but
human life will go on
okay but what if we explode more nuclear
weapons let's suppose humanity decided
to mine every bit of uranium on earth
and build as many nuclear bombs as
possible at current usage it's estimated
that there are around 35 million tons of
uranium in Earth's crust enough to power
human civilization for over 2,000 years
or to build millions of nuclear warheads
for the sake of argument let's say we
create a pile with the yield of 10
billion Hiroshima bombs which makes up a
cube three kilometers high that contains
roughly the energy of the asteroid
impact that ended the age of the
dinosaurs 65 million years ago except
it's also nuclear three to one how pile
explodes in a fireball stretching so
high into the sky
that it's visible from half of South
America with so much power that the
ground just splashes like water forming
a crater 100 kilometers across bedrock
on the scale of whole mountain ranges is
vaporized in an instant while thousands
of tons of material is catapulted away
with such speed that it's ejected into
space some leaves earth forever while
most of it comes raining down as hot
burning debris that heats up the
atmosphere to oven-like temperatures
killing most big animals and causing
fire storms all over the world the
Earth's crust rings like a bell struck
by global earthquakes stronger than
anything in recorded history decimating
cities around the world while
hurricane-force winds flatten every
single tree in South America and
wildfires consume the continents the
abundance of hydrocarbons in the Amazon
burn to form ash are cast into the
atmosphere
darting the sky and keeping sunlight
from reaching the surface dropping
temperatures to near freezing worldwide
the ensuing global winter may last for
decades
and results in the extinction of every
large animal species humans included we
could also mention that every corner of
the planet is covered with radioactive
fallout but at this point it doesn't
matter that much anymore
this is humanity's extinction event the
astronauts aboard the international
space station get to enjoy a great view
for a while but it's not unlikely that
the spray of rocks blast into orbit will
destroy the station those lucky enough
to be in bunkers or in submarines deep
below the ocean surface may survive the
longest before they exhaust their food
supplies and have to venture out for
more they'll find the world a charred
freezing radioactive wasteland the
planet itself doesn't care at all after
just a few million years the wounds of
the explosions have healed and life is
thriving arguably even more so than when
humans were around if intelligent life
emerges again it might be able to work
out what happened when they study
geology they'll find a bizarre and very
thin layer of rock covering the entire
world enriched in radioactive elements
like uranium and the other nasty things
it decay sooo mixed with rare earth
metals and plastics that humans used
they would probably be very very
confused videos like this one take well
over 1200 hours to finish over the years
we put more and more effort into
research conversations with experts
illustration and animation sound design
and fact-checking
for this video we put a lot of extra
work into our sources document you can
read how we got to the information in
the video what our experts thought about
it where they disagreed with each other
we can take the time to do this because
of you our viewers because you watch and
share our videos by our posters and
support us on patreon com if you like
what we're doing please consider
becoming a patron or get one of the nice
things we made with love thank you for
watching
[Music]